docs/index.rst, before:

:hidetoc: 1

==============
numbers-parser
==============

.. only:: MarkdownDocs

   .. image:: https://github.com/masaccio/numbers-parser/actions/workflows/run-all-tests.yml/badge.svg
      :target: https://github.com/masaccio/numbers-parser/actions/workflows/run-all-tests.yml
      :alt: Test Status

   .. image:: https://github.com/masaccio/numbers-parser/actions/workflows/codeql.yml/badge.svg
      :target: https://github.com/masaccio/numbers-parser/actions/workflows/codeql.yml
      :alt: Security Checks

   .. image:: https://codecov.io/gh/masaccio/numbers-parser/branch/main/graph/badge.svg?token=EKIUFGT05E
      :target: https://codecov.io/gh/masaccio/numbers-parser
      :alt: Code Coverage

   .. image:: https://badge.fury.io/py/numbers-parser.svg
      :target: https://badge.fury.io/py/numbers-parser
      :alt: PyPI Version


``numbers-parser`` is a Python module for parsing `Apple Numbers 
<https://www.apple.com/numbers/>`__\ ``.numbers`` files. It supports Numbers files
generated by Numbers version 10.3, and up with the latest tested version being 13.2
(current as of September 2023).

It supports and is tested against Python versions from 3.8 onwards. It is not compatible
with earlier versions of Python.

.. only:: HtmlDocs

  Getting started
  ===============

  Start with these documents to get you up and running:

  .. toctree::
     :includehidden:

     quick-start
     installation
     cli
     limitations

  API Reference
  =============

  .. toctree::
     :name: apitoc
     :maxdepth: 2

     api/document
     api/cells
     api/datetime
     api/cellrefs
     api/enumerations
     api/development
     api/changes-4.0

.. only:: MarkdownDocs

   .. include:: installation.rst
   .. include:: quick-start.rst
   .. include:: cli.rst

License
=======

All code in this repository is licensed under the `MIT
License <https://github.com/masaccio/numbers-parser/blob/master/LICENSE.rst>`__

Commit message:

Added link to API docs

docs/index.rst, after:

:hidetoc: 1

==============
numbers-parser
==============

.. only:: MarkdownDocs

   .. image:: https://github.com/masaccio/numbers-parser/actions/workflows/run-all-tests.yml/badge.svg
      :target: https://github.com/masaccio/numbers-parser/actions/workflows/run-all-tests.yml
      :alt: Test Status

   .. image:: https://github.com/masaccio/numbers-parser/actions/workflows/codeql.yml/badge.svg
      :target: https://github.com/masaccio/numbers-parser/actions/workflows/codeql.yml
      :alt: Security Checks

   .. image:: https://codecov.io/gh/masaccio/numbers-parser/branch/main/graph/badge.svg?token=EKIUFGT05E
      :target: https://codecov.io/gh/masaccio/numbers-parser
      :alt: Code Coverage

   .. image:: https://badge.fury.io/py/numbers-parser.svg
      :target: https://badge.fury.io/py/numbers-parser
      :alt: PyPI Version


``numbers-parser`` is a Python module for parsing `Apple Numbers 
<https://www.apple.com/numbers/>`__\ ``.numbers`` files. It supports Numbers files
generated by Numbers version 10.3, and up with the latest tested version being 13.2
(current as of September 2023).

It supports and is tested against Python versions from 3.8 onwards. It is not compatible
with earlier versions of Python.

.. only:: HtmlDocs

  Getting started
  ===============

  Start with these documents to get you up and running:

  .. toctree::
     :includehidden:

     quick-start
     installation
     cli
     limitations

  API Reference
  =============

  .. toctree::
     :name: apitoc
     :maxdepth: 2

     api/document
     api/cells
     api/datetime
     api/cellrefs
     api/enumerations
     api/development
     api/changes-4.0

.. only:: MarkdownDocs

   .. include:: installation.rst
   .. include:: quick-start.rst

   API
   ---

   For more examples and details of all available classes and methods,
   see the `full API docs <https://masaccio.github.io/numbers-parser/>`__.

   .. include:: cli.rst

License
=======

All code in this repository is licensed under the `MIT
License <https://github.com/masaccio/numbers-parser/blob/master/LICENSE.rst>`__
